---
title: "Project 1: Intro to Android, Containers, and Observers"
layout: project
categories: assignment
published: true
due: 2018-09-10
permalink: /projects/1
---

In this project, you'll be expanding the example app we worked on
throughout the first few days of the course.  You'll be learning some
of the basic ideas of Android programming along with implementing a
few basic data structures and patterns in Java. There is an emphasis
not on Android UI (which is largely trivia, and I expect you to learn
on your own) but instead on good software engineering: code reuse,
testing, and thoughtful use of object-oriented design.

This assignment has 100 points, 20 of which are reserved for code
style. I will grade code style fairly aggressively, so I strongly
recommend taking it seriously. You don't have to follow the style I
would write down to a tee, but you need to make consistent choices
about your code.

You will have three weeks to work on this assignment. I expect that
good solutions to this project will take a few hundred lines
(including logic, tests, etc..), but probably less than 1000. There
are a lot of tricky things to learn in this project, especially since
it's in an unfamiliar language and will use concepts that you probably
don't fully understand quite yet. I strongly recommend you take the
three-week time on the assignment as an indication of the fact that it
will be a decent amount of work, more than you can get done in the
last few days.

Good luck! I think this one will hopefully be a lot of fun.

### Part 0: Getting the App Set Up on Your Machine

### Part 1: Fleshing Out an Implementation (10 points)

For this part of the assignment, you will complete the implementation
of several methods in `SquirrelList` that I've left for you to do. All
of these functions are marked with `TODO` in that file, along with a
descriptive comment. Specifically, you will be adding the following
methods (and their associated tests):

- A constructor that allows you to create a list from an array
- `isEmpty`
- `contains`
- `toArray`
- `remove`
- `addAll`
- `clear`

You must also write associated tests for all of these methods. I've
scattered a few throughout, some pass (but the ones that pass do so
because the tests aren't covering all of the behavior). For example,
the test for `isEmpty` passes right now because that method always
returns false.

### Part 2: Debugging A Faulty Implementation (15 points)

For the first part of the assignment, you will be debugging some
faulty code. The broken code is in the `remove()` function of the
iterator for the implementation of `SquirrelList`.

I have written a *passing* test for the `remove function in the test
suite for `SquirrelList`. It is called `list_removeLink`. However,
despite my passing test, the function is still broken. I didn't test
enough of the behavior to reveal the bug.

In this part of the assignment, your job is to sit and think hard
about the implementaito of `remove` to decide why it is broken. Then,
I want you to write a test that *fails* but *should* pass. In other
words, I want you to write a test that explains the correct behavior
you would expect, but fails because the implementation is broken.

- (5 points) Write a test exhibiting the broken implementation of
  `remove`.

Next, I want you to go through the `remove` function during the
execution of the test. To do this, set a breakpoint on the `remove`
function and examine the state of the iterator and the list as the
function is executing.

- (5 points) Show me a screenshot of your debugger during the
  execution of the `remove` function.

Last, I want you to fix the implementation of `remove` so that the
test doesn't break.


- (5 points) Fix the implementation of `remove` so that the test no
  longer breaks.

### Part 3: Implementing a Doubly-Linked List (15 points)

In this part of the assignment, I want you to write an implementation
of a *doubly* linked list. A singly-linked list allows us to move
forward, e.g., by using calls to `next`, but doesn't allow us to move
backwards. If we want to get to the previous node in a list, we have
to start over from the beginning. A doubly-linked list has links on
both sides, so that you can move forwards and backwards.

I've provided a skeleton implementation of a doubly linked list for
you to extend yourself, which I've called
`SquirrelDoublyLinkedList`. As with all of the things you write in
this class, you also need a set of tests to go along with your
implementation.

For this part, you need to implement all of the methods in the
`SquirrelDoublyLinkedList` class so that all of the tests pass. You
must also implement the iterator
`SquirrelDoublyLinkedListIterator`. Along with your iterator, you must
think up several tests to show to me that it works. 

Right now, all of the tests in `SquirrelDoublyLinkedListTest`
fail. For full points, you must make all of your tests
pass. Additionally, you must write (at least one) test that shows that
`.prev` is working correctly. I would do this by making a list that
was three nodes long (A, B, and C), going to the third, and then going
back two, finally checking to ensure that the thing you get at the end
is A.

You will find most of the relevant code for this part in the file
`SquirrelDoublyLinkedList.java`. You should extend the classes in the
proper places. Keep in mind that all of the tests for a singly-linked
list should still pass for your doubly-linked
list. But--additionally--you should add some more tests that allow you
to iterate backwards.

- (5 points) The implementation of `SquirrelDoublyLinkedList`

- (5 points) The implementation of `SquirrelDoublyLinkedListIterator`

- (5 points) A passing test suite that includes relevant tests for all
  interesting behavior in the doubly-linked list

#### Regarding Code Reuse

The implementation of `SquirrelList` was a decent amount of code. At
first glance, it may appear that you have to do a ton of that work
*again* for `SquirrelDoublyLinkedLiist`. But if you find yourself
repeating much code, you're probably doing something wrong. 

In fact, you really shouldn't have to add *that* much code at all. The
key to getting this part done easily is to realize that double-links
are subclasses of single-links, so that any method that can work with
single-links can also work on double links.

### Part 4: Implementing a Custom Adapter With an Observer (15 points)

Right now, the implementation 

### Part 5: A Task to Parse and Add Squirrels (10 points)

In this part of the assignment, you're going to leverage the observer
that you wrote in the last part. The way we've written our adapter, it
tells the Android system how to draw the dataset in question. So, for
example, when you open up the app, it shows you the first ten or so
squirrels. The issue is that--once the data is drawn on the
screen--it's done. What happens if the squirrel data changes? E.g.,
what happens if a squirrel is added to the front of the list? In that
case, the view is out of data with the data.

This is the purpose of the observer we just built. To test it out, we
need to have something about the squirrel data change. To do this,
we're going to use a "task."

The purpose of a task is to run computations that might take a long
time. The phone is constantly redrawing the screen, processing user
clicks, running your code, etc... The problem comes in when you have a
piece of code that takes a long time to run. Say, for example, you
were to download something from the internet. It may take a few
seconds (or even minutes) to complete. During this whole time, if your
code is running, you won't be able to interact with the app at all: it
will just feel like the screen is sitting there, totally stale and
lifeless.

So realistic applications run multiple threads of computation. One
special "main" thread does all of the drawing on the screen, and also
processes things like button clicks, etc.. But you can launch other
threads. One way to do this is to use Java's low level `Thread`
interface. You may be familiar with this from other courses. In this
assignment, we won't be using threads explicitly. Instead, we'll be
using a "task", an abstraction built around threads to allow you to
write code that runs in the background without you having to make a
thread explicitly. Tasks have some advantages that we're not going to
talk about quite yet.

Your task will download JSON data from a particular URL and "parse" it
into Squirrel objects that will be added to the list of squirrels. The
JSON that I'll give you looks like this: 

    [
      {
        "name": "African Ground Squirrel",
        "location": "Africa"
        "picture": "https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/52/Borstenhoernchen-02.jpg/300px-Borstenhoernchen-02.jpg"
      },
      ...
    ]

In other words, it's an array (list) of JSON objects, each with a
field for name, location, and picture.

### Part 6: Downloading Squirrel Images Asynchronously (10 points)

In the original app I'm giving you, the squirrel picture is just a
generic squirrel icon. I want you to figure out how to load an image
from the corresponding URL and put it into the squirrel picture.

This part is mostly open-ended exploration on your part. I want you to
figure out how to Google for the various things you need to get your
work done, and then I want you to string them together to make the app
work in the right way. Make sure that you download the image sent in
the *intent* rather than just some fixed image (the image URL should
be in the `picture` part of the intent object).

This part took me a good hour or two: ten minutes to do it, and fifty
minutes to debug what was going on.

### Part 7: Integration Testing (5 points)

### Part 8: Add Something (5 points)

This part is worth five points. Add *something* to the app that
requires at least ten lines of (Java, not XML) code to function. In
other words, you can't get credit for this part by just messing around
with the app's styling and appearance. Think of something you'd like
to add, and add that to the app.

To get full credit for this part, you must also add corresponding
tests to show that the feature you wanted to add works.

Write about what you did in the space below (do *not* email it to me,
etc... I will only accept this for credit if you put it here. Aim to
write 2-3 paragraphs at most, and point out the relevant parts of the
code / tests).

# Grading

I will add up all of the points here, which constitute 80% of the
grade. The remaining 20% of the grade is based on code style. For full
code style, you need to have the following:

- Good indentation, variable names, proper use of @Override, etc...

- Thoughtful comments on all complex methods (more than three lines)
  that follows the JavaDoc conventions and specifies return values,
  relevant things (e.g., preconditions when you think they're
  meaningful) to the method's operation, which exceptions are thrown,
  etc.. You don't have to follow a rote formula, and if in doubt,
  write less. I reserve the right to take off points if your
  documentation is way too verbose (programmers have limited time,
  make comments succinct and to the point) or out of date with the
  code (this is a big problem when writing docs, keep them up to
  date).

- Tests for all of the important parts of your program. This includes
  both unit tests and integration (/instrumentation) tests. Tests
  should be both good and orthogonal: I will take off points if I see
  things like 20 tests that all cover the same behavior in the
  program. In my experience, new programmers have a bad habit: they
  tend to write too many tests for simple parts of the code (e.g.,
  getters), and they write too few tests for complex parts of their
  code. The number of tests you have should scale with the complexity
  of the code, which is not always related to its line
  count. Specifically *do not* write tests for very simple functions
  like getters and setters.

- Avoid redundancy. If I see any code duplication, ever, I'm going to
  take off points. For example, in this assignment, I could have
  copied all of the code from `SquirrelIterator` to
  `SquirrelDoublyLinkedListIterator`, rather than extending the
  class. This is an example of redundant code. To understand why this
  is so important, think about what happens if you were to change
  `SquirrelIterator`: you'd likely also want to change
  `SquirrelDoublyLinkedListIterator` (since a
  `SquirrelDoublyLinkedList` extends from a `SquirrelList`). If you
  had to do this manually, it would be a bit frustrating, but it would
  be even worse if you *forgot* to do it. This is a frequent source of
  subtle bugs.

Last, it's hard to write apps that work. Testing your app to make sure
it's bullet-proof is important, but an often overlooked aspect by
students. I want you to write code that works really well. The
difference between "kind of working" code and "totally working" code
is often pretty vast. So I will deduct 7% from your final grade if--at
any point--I was able to observe a crash in the app. I'll write you to
explain the behavior.

# Rubric

- Part 1 (X)/10
- Part 2 (X)/15
- Part 3 (X)/15
- Part 4 (X)/15
- Part 5 (X)/5
- Part 6 (X)/10
- Part 7 (X)/5
- Part 8 (X)/5
- Style:
   - (X)/5 Low-level things, variable names, indentation, proper annotations
   - (X)/5 Comments on relevant things, following proper javadoc convention
   - (X)/5 Proper testing (Yes, I will take off twice, it's that important!)
   - (X)/5 Avoiding redundancy, thoughtful object-oriented design
- Total: 100
- Adjustment factors: 
  - You will lose 7% if I can figure out how to get your app to crash
    just by using it. I will be taking your app and playing around
    with it a bit. If--at any time as I run it--I see a crash (for any
    reason), you will lose 7% off your total grade.
  - +3% if you tackle an especially hard debugging challenge and
    *wrote a test* demonstrating the failure, and then fixed the
    problem. If you do this, write me an email. This is at my
    discretion. No points awarded (/ don't email me) if you can't
    figure out how to write a test that exhibits the behavior.

# Questions to Think About

- When would using `protected` be advantageous, versus `private`?

